Scientists say they have developed a system that uses machine learning to predict when and where lightning will strike. Researchers report the system is able to predict lightning strikes up to 30 minutes before they happen within a 30-kilometer area. The research was led by engineers from the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Lausanne, Switzerland. The results were reported in the publication Climate and Atmospheric Science. Lightning is a strong burst of electricity in the atmosphere. It is one of the oldest observed weather events on Earth. It can strike between clouds or between a cloud and the ground. Since lightning carries an extremely powerful electrical charge, it can be destructive and deadly. It is difficult to know exactly how many people die of lightning-related causes. European researchers have estimated that between 6,000 and 24,000 people are killed by lightning worldwide each year. The strikes can also cause power outages, destroy property, damage electrical equipment and start forest fires. For this reason, climate scientists have long sought to develop methods to predict and control lightning. In the United States and other places, ground-based sensing devices are used to identify strikes as they happen. But, no system has been created to effectively predict or stop lightning. The system tested in the experiments uses a combination of data from weather stations and machine learning methods. The researchers developed a prediction model that was trained to recognize weather conditions that were likely to cause lightning. The model was created with data collected over a 12-year period from 12 Swiss weather stations in cities and mountain areas. The data related to four main surface conditions: air pressure, air temperature, relative humidity and wind speed. “Our method uses data that can be obtained from any weather station,” Mostajabi said. This will improve data collection in very remote areas not covered by radar and satellite or in places where communication systems have been cut, he added. The researchers plan to keep developing the technology in partnership with a European effort that aims to create a lightning protection system. The effort is called the European Laser Lightning Rod project. Scientists working on the Paris-based project are experimenting with a laser technology that could someday control lightning activity. The idea is that powerful, ground-based lasers can be positioned in the sky to direct energy from lightning. The experiments involve the use of lasers to transfer lightning charges from clouds to the ground. The method uses a lightning rod placed at the base of the laser to take in electrical charges from lightning in the clouds. Researchers say laboratory testing has shown that lasers can be used as a way to guide lightning to a direct, safe path to the ground. They hope that such technology can one day be deployed as protection against lightning strikes. Possible uses could be at power plants, airports or places where large crowds gather. A Japanese spacecraft has left a distant asteroid and started its return trip to Earth after successfully completing its mission. The Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency, known as JAXA, said the Hayabusa2 spacecraft left its orbit around the asteroid Ryugu, Wednesday. The space rock is currently about 300 million kilometers from Earth. Hayabusa 2’s mission was to gather soil samples and information that could provide clues to how the solar system formed, the country’s space agency said. The spacecraft is to bring those samples back so scientists can study them in a laboratory. Workers at the command center stood up and cheered when JAXA project manager Yuichi Tsuda confirmed the departure. The spacecraft captured pictures of Ryugu as it began its return trip and sent them back to Earth. The asteroid Ryugu, or Dragon Palace, is named after a sea-bottom castle in a traditional Japanese story. Hayabusa2 will continue its “farewell filming” of the asteroid for a few more days, JAXA said. As the spacecraft travels away from the asteroid and toward Earth it will adjust its position. It will retreat about 65 kilometers from the asteroid and out of its the gravitational pull. After that, the asteroid will be out of sight of the spacecraft. “It’s sad to say goodbye to Ryugu,” Tsuda told reporters. “Literally it has been at the center of our lives over the past 1½ years.” The spacecraft will then start its main thrusters in early December to power it back to Earth. The return trip will take about one year. “We expect Hayabusa2 will bring us new scientific insights,” Tsuda said. “Not only the data, but tangible samples will be in our hands.” Hayabusa2 arrived at the 900-meter-long asteroid in June 2018. The spacecraft touched down on the extremely rocky asteroid two times and successfully collected information and soil. The first touchdown took place in February. Hayabusa2 collected surface dust samples at the time. In July, it collected samples from beneath the surface of the asteroid after landing in a shallow hole that it had blasted. The operation was the first of its kind in the history of space exploration. Scientists said they detected small amounts of carbon and organic material in the asteroid soil samples. “They will allow us to explore how carbon, organic matter and water are scattered around in the solar system, why they exist on Ryugu, how they are related to the Earth,” Tsuda said.